Okay, so in the third session that
we're gonna do in this course,
we're gonna look at the subject of design.
And how to go about creating great design
that encourages people to take action.
Now the chances are that if
you're watching this course,
because of the nature of the courses
that Frontend Masters create,
you're probably more development
focused than you are design.
Yet, almost always, developers end up
having to do some design at some point.
Sometimes they're doing the entire design.
Sometimes they're just doing parts of it.
And it can be a very frustrating
experience producing a design.
It's frustrating for designers,
let alone for a developer having to do it.
And part of the problem from a development
point of view is when it comes to code,
code either works or it doesn't, right?
All design is subjective, isn't it?
Everybody's got an opinion on it.
And you can end up caught in these
endless loops of iteration, moving pixels
around the page, changing colors just
to keep stakeholders and clients happy.
But actually,
it doesn't need to be that way.
They're all fundamental rules that
underpin a design process and
enable you to say with confidence whether
a design is going to work or not.
And so that's what we're gonna
explore in this section.
We're gonna look at how design can
play a pivotal role in encouraging
people to convert and
to take action on your website.
And how we can ensure that
our design is appropriate for
our audience that we're trying to reach.
And hopefully in the process,
avoid all those endless iterations.
So with that, let's have a look at what
we're gonna cover in this segment.
We are gonna look at three fundamental
parts of creating any compelling design.
One is the ability to lead people's
attention around the page that they look
at what we want them to look at
when we want them to look at it.
Because we want to tell a story,
we wanna unpack what our offering is, and
that means that we need people to look in
particular places at particular times.
Second, we're gonna look at creating
compelling calls to action,
the actual physical action
that we want people to take.
Whether it be sign up for a newsletter,
make purchase a product, whatever it is,
how do we make sure that users, a,
see them, and b, click on them?
And then the third is how do
we ensure that our design,
the aesthetics of a website
keeps users engaged, right?
How do we ensure that
it resonates with them,
creates the best reaction
possible with them?
And that is obviously where things
can get very subjective, and
we're gonna get into
that as we come to it.
So let's start with
the first of those three,
which is leading the user's attention.
And actually,
it's not as difficult as you think.
It's actually just
a relatively straightforward
process that anybody can do even if
you're not particularly creative.
Because I'm not claiming the designs that
you're gonna produce following watching
this are gonna be beautiful or
gonna be wonderful.
But they will convert, they will
encourage people to complete action.
And the ability to lead someone's
attention around the page is
really just a matter of
following a few simple rules.
Rule number one is to simplify, okay?
So before you do your final design,
you need to identify all
the content blocks you create.
And you might wanna create a bit of
a wire frame, where you lay them all out
on the page and kinda get
everything roughly in place, right?
Doesn't need to be pretty at this stage.
Now once you've done that, you're now
gonna wanna go back through that page.
And with each of the elements that you've
added, you're gonna wanna simplify them.
You're gonna wanna reduce the complexity
of the page so people's cognitive load is
lower, and they're not overwhelmed and
their eyes are skipping all over the page.
And the way you do that is for each
element that you've added to the page,
ask three questions, and
ask these questions in order, right?
Question number one is can I
remove this element, right?
So that might be some social media
icons or it might be your primary
call to action or your logo or
search box or navigation bar.
Whatever the item is, could you remove it?
If you removed it, would it undermine or
reduce your conversion rate in any way?
If the answer to that is no,
it wouldn't affect the conversion rate,
then you need to remove it.
Because items only have value
if they're actually moving
someone towards taking
action on your website.
If anything else is just noise, it's just
clutter that is going to increase people's
cognitive load, put them in a bad mood,
reduce the chance of their conversion.
Put another way,
we've all heard of the phrase finding
a needle in a haystack, right?
Every element you add to a page
is another piece of hay, right?
That makes it harder to find that needle,
key call to action,
that key piece of content.
Effectively, users have limited attention
and we need to spend it wisely.
But that said,
you can't remove everything, right?
Obviously, some content is very critical,
and so
you wouldn't wanna remove
that from your site.
Other content might not be critical for
your primary audience, but
might be critical for
a secondary audience.
So they can be things that you can't
remove, but maybe you can hide it.
You can deemphasize it in some ways.
So let's say, for example,
on an e-commerce site,
the information about
account management and
that kind of thing is not critical for
somebody buying the item.
But it's still very important for
existing customers.
So you don't wanna remove it entirely from
the website, but you might wanna hide it.
And by that, I mean, move it deeper
in the information architecture.
Move it onto a subpage somewhere.
Or alternatively, put it under a tab or
a toggle or something like that.
So it's not immediately
in people's way and
it's not cluttering up
the visual interface.
So by moving things either deeper
in the information architecture,
hiding them under a tab, or even putting
them lower on the page in a footer or
something like that.
You can help to deemphasize them and
clear the way for other content.
And then the third question you need
to ask, if you can't remove it or
you can't hide it.
So typical examples of this would be
something like compliance information
that you say you're selling insurance or
some financial service.
There's certain text that you have to
have visible for compliance reasons.
Well, then your third option is,
can I shrink this?
Can I visually deemphasize it,
make it smaller font or a lighter color or
whatever else to just
visually deemphasize it so
that people's attention
stays in the right place?
And there is actually an exercise that
I sometimes do with stakeholders called
a user attention point exercise.
And in this exercise, I get all of my
stakeholders together, and together we
brainstorm every conceivable item that
might need to go onto a landing page or
homepage.
And then when we finish doing that,
we can often end up with 50 or
more different items that
can potentially go on
from individual navigation items
to e-commerce categories, etc.
After we've done that,
the next thing I say is I explain that
users have got limited attention.
That people normally make
a decision about a website and
whether to stay on it in
approximately eight seconds.
And they can only process so
much information in those eight seconds.
So I represent those eight seconds in
terms of points, user attention points.
So for example, we could say they could
process two or three items in a second.
So then we end up with 21 points of user
attention or something along those lines.
And they have to spend those user
attention points on the different
elements.
The elements they want people
to pay more attention to,
they have to add more points to.
So a call to action may want four or
five or
even more attention points
associated with it.
And it's a way of getting people to think
through the amount of noise that they're
introducing, the amount of distractions
they're introducing onto the homepage.
So simplify, simplify, simplify.
Don't get seduced by adding
aesthetic elements for
the sake of it, right,
pretty images and things like that.
If it doesn't add value,
if it's not gonna move people towards that
point of conversion, you don't want it.
Less is more when it comes to design.
So we simplify it as much as possible.
Now we need to consider the page flow.
And to be honest, almost all landing
pages have a pretty consistent and
similar layout to them.
And that is basically what
I've been touching on and
off through the whole
of the content section.
So we begin with our summary, which
is our value proposition effectively.
Then we go into our benefits,
and then our features.
But intermixed with that is calls
to action and social proof.
So normally,
wherever I have a call to action,
I normally associate a social proof
alongside it just to reassure people and
to say, yes, you're doing the right thing.
Look, these other people
have been doing it, too.
And I tend to include that pretty near
the top, the call to action pretty near
the top for returning users so that they
don't have to scroll away down the page.
If it's a long page, I'll include
a call to action in the middle as well.
And then at the end of the page,
I normally end with a call to action and
associated social proof as well.
And that way,
you're taking people on a journey.
So you're answering the key questions that
come into their minds as they come in.
So the first question when they land
on a site is what does this site do and
what does it offer me, right?
And that's what your value
proposition does, right?
So I'm on the right site
is the first question.
Does it offer the kind
of thing I wanna do?
Value proposition, how does it help me?
That's where your benefits come in,
where you talk about benefits.
And then it's how do they
deliver on those benefits?
And that's where your features come in.
And then obviously, your social proof is
just reassurance that goes alongside that.
So the layout and the flow of your pages
is gonna be pretty consistently the same
for any kind of product page, landing
page, homepage, that kind of thing.
Then you can go with this formula and
be fairly confident you're gonna see
a reasonable conversion rate from it.
It's not some artistic kind of black
box that just spews out websites.
There is process here that
you can follow through.
The other thing that you need to
consider as you create the flow of
the page is the way that
people read as well.
You need to be acutely aware
that in Western countries,
which use a Latin character set, we read
from left to right and from top to bottom.
And presuming that's you,
that has quite a fundamental
impact on how you design pages.
So for example, we tend to read
in what's called an F shape.
So we scan across a line, and
then scan down the left-hand side a bit.
And then scan across when something
else grabs our attention,
and then down a bit and scan across again.
And it's a very particular way of reading,
but what it means is that there
are certain dead spots on the page
which don't tend to perform very well.
So the right-hand side, for example,
tends to not get a lot of attention to it.
Now, there are other factors that
influence this, but generally speaking,
the right-hand side of a page won't
get as much attention as the left.
So you don't wanna put critical calls to
action on the right-hand side of the page.
Very simple rule that you can remember and
implement as you go
about designing things.
But the biggest thing, and
this goes back to the question we
had earlier about long form pages,
is that you need to really
make your pages as scannable as
possible however long they are, right?
So if they use content blocks,
that's quite a nice easy formula to use
with a heading, a short description,
a link and an image.
That's by its nature content
blocks are scannable.
But if it's a longer form piece,
then you're gonna need to kind
of build that scannability in.
So obviously, I have a blog.
My blog has obviously
some quite long posts.
But if you've noticed the way that
I've got this here on the page,
there's pull out quotes, there's headings.
There's related links, there's
highlighted copy, bullet points, imagery,
lots of things that essentially
enable someone to scan down the page.
Also look how I've included a lot
of spacing around elements to
allow them to breathe, and so
that the eye isn't working too hard.
The other thing is don't make
your line lengths too long,
because the longer the line length,
the more eye strain.
We've got move eyes more back and forth.
There's a sweet spot of about 40 to
70 characters on a line which seems
to work quite well.
So break up content.
Don't have big,
long paragraph after paragraph of text,
cuz that people just won't read it.
They won't look at it.
So you have to support scannability
in the way that you design.
So there are a lot of elements
to consider here, but
you don't need the creative or
artistic gene for any of them.
The kind of stuff that we're talking about
here is just following a set of rules
to make something simple and
clean and straightforward.
Then we got to start talking maybe about
some of the more creative elements
that you bring into,
things like imagery and shapes.
You might wanna start introducing
imagery alongside the kind of layout
that you've got to
represent different things.
And generally speaking,
imagery is a more static decision, but
can be used to signal to an audience
that this site is for them.
It can be used to create
the right emotional feel over it,
which may be a little bit woolly,
and we'll get onto in a minute.
But one other thing that imagery
does is it draws the eye.
It controls where people look.
And you can actually use that factor
to guide people's eyes around the page.
We are kind of programmed
to pay particular attention
to visual feedback and
visual imagery over things like text.
And so it can be used to draw attention.
So this mock-up that I've
produced is a great example.
All of the imagery on this page or most
of the imagery on this page is designed
to draw the user's attention to that
call to action button of Shop Now.
So everything from the imagery itself, but
also the shapes that have
been added to the interface.
Let me show you what I mean.
So as you can see here,
we've got this triangle that's been
created by the typography at the top.
So it's narrowing down towards the button,
right?
Then on top of that, you've got
the background image of this woman behind
the button, which is positioned
right next to the button and
drawing your attention that way.
And you've even got the mountains
underneath that are pointing
upwards back up to the button.
But then after that, you've got this guy
in the left-hand corner whose eyeline,
even though he's wearing a headset, his
eyeline is looking up towards the button.
And where someone's eyeline is
makes an enormous difference.
We follow people's eyelines.
Add to that, he's actually pointing at the
button with his, we'll say his left arm.
And then on the back of the woman's head,
she's actually got a triangle,
which is pointing upwards
towards the button.
So you can see how just by
the positioning of imagery,
you can draw attention to anything
particular that you want on the page.
To really drive that home,
let me show you eye tracking study and
show you how big
a difference this can make.
Here's a design using not
a very clever design.
It's got a little bit of text on the left.
It's got some copy written there,
and under that is a call to action.
And you can notice how all of
the attention on that page is drawn to
the call to action.
Now look what happens if I
just take this guy out and
replace him with a slightly
different image, right?
Look how suddenly everything changes.
The attention is no longer on that button,
but it's instead on her face and cleavage.
I won't even get into that conversation.
It's a human characteristic.
We can't help it.
We're all the same.
But that doesn't work as
an image because she is looking
directly at the camera and
she's holding our gaze.
And also, there's this line that's
going down between her arm and
the background that's creating
a barrier between the two.
So what's happening is somebody's
eyes are hitting this page,
immediately jumping across to her.
Because faces are more compelling and
hold our attention and
never getting back over
to the left-hand side.
Now when you compare that to
the original image, right,
our eyes are still jumping directly
over to the guy on the right-hand side.
But then we're following his eye and his
eyeline immediately back over to the left.
So we don't miss that copy and
the call to action associated with it.
So think about when you select an image,
are they looking into the page or
out of the page?
Are they looking towards
the call to action?
Are there visual indicators that are
pointing at critical pieces of content?
Things like that will make an enormous
difference in terms of whether somebody
spots your call to action or just scrolls
straight by it and doesn't see it.
And the same is true with key content,
etc.
So that's a little bit about how we can
draw people's attention around the page.